.TH "putmail.py" "1" "1.4" "Ricardo Garcia Gonzalez" "User Manuals"
.SH "NAME"
.LP 
putmail.py \- SMTP client
.SH "SYNTAX"
.LP 
putmail.py [\fIoption...\fP] \fIrecipient...\fP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.LP 
\fBputmail.py\fR is a very lightweight MTA or SMTP client that may
replace the \fBsendmail\fR command when used by MUAs that lack SMTP
support.
.LP 
Usually, \fBputmail.py\fR is not called directly from the
command line. Instead, programs are configured to deliver mail
using \fBputmail.py\fR. It accepts all the options
\fBsendmail\fR does, but ignores most of them. You can find
all the options in the \fBCOMMAND LINE OPTIONS\fR section.
.LP 
The program reads an e\-mail message from standard input and
tries to deliver it to the specified recipients using the
apropiate configuration file, which is
.IP 
\fI$HOME/.putmail/putmailrc\fR
.LP 
by default. As you see, configuration files are per\-user. For
security reasons, you may want to set permissions so only you
have access to the configuration directory.
.LP 
The exact configuration file name is chosen according to the
address used in the \fIFrom\fR header of the e\-mail message,
which allows you to have several configuration files and bind
SMTP servers to e\-mail addresses.
.LP 
For example, if the e\-mail message looks like:
.IP 
(headers...)
.br 
\fBFrom: Joe User <juser@example.com>\fR
.br 
(headers...)
.br 

.br 
(message contents...)
.br 

.LP 
The program will try to use the file
.IP 
\fI$HOME/.putmail/juser@example.com\fR
.LP 
If that file is not
available, it will fall back to the default one.
.LP 
Any errors and warnings are printed to standard error and also
to the log file named
.IP 
\fI$HOME/.putmail/putmail.log\fR
.LP 
except for the error message about the HOME environment
variable not present, for obvious reasons.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
.LP 
Configuration files have the same format as INI files. They must
have a section named \fIconfig\fR and, at least, two options:
\fIserver\fR and \fIemail\fR. Those set the SMTP server to use
and the envelope from address used when contacting the server. It is
a good idea to set this to the same address you use in the \fIFrom\fR
header of the e\-mail message, but not strictly necessary.
\fBputmail.py\fR will not change the \fIFrom\fR header. Example:
.IP 
[config]
.br 
server = smtp.example.com
.br 
email = user@example.com
.LP 
Please note that the text indentation in the example should not be
present in the real file, where all the lines should start at column
number 1. You can authenticate to the SMTP server and use TLS
indicating more options. This is the complete list:
.TP 
\fIserver\fR
The SMTP server to use.
.TP 
\fIemail\fR
The envelope from address used when contacting with the server.
.TP 
\fIusername\fR
The username used when authenticating to the SMTP server. You
must, then, indicate a password with the \fIpassword\fR
option. By default no authentication is used.
.TP 
\fIpassword\fR
The password used when authenticating to the SMTP server.
.TP 
\fIport\fR
The server port. The default value is 25.
.TP 
\fItls\fR
Boolean option to enable or disable TLS. It is disabled by
default or when its value is \fIno\fR, \fI0\fR, \fIoff\fR
or \fIfalse\fR. Set it to \fIyes\fR, \fI1\fR, \fIon\fR
or \fItrue\fR to enable TLS.
.TP 
\fIquiet\fR
Boolean option, disabled by default. When active, errors
and warnings related to communication with the SMTP server
will not be printed on screen. See the \fItls\fR option
for possible values. Use it with care and once you know
your configuration works. In most cases this will not be
needed. However, sometimes warnings about improper
connection shutdown can get really annoying. Errors
related to malformed configuration files, absence of
message recipients and others will still be printed.
.SH "COMMAND LINE OPTIONS"
.LP 
.TP 
\fB\-\-\fP
Marks end of options. Remaining arguments are recipients.
.TP 
\fB\-t\fR
Take recipients from the \fITo\fR, \fICc\fR and \fIBcc\fR
message headers.
.TP 
\fB\-f\fR \fIfrom_address\fP
Use this address as the SMTP protocol envelope from address,
replacing the \fIemail\fR option in the configuration file.
.LP 
And the following options are accepted but ignored:
.LP 
\fB\-Ac\fR
.br 
\fB\-Am\fR
.br 
\fB\-ba\fR
.br 
\fB\-bm\fR
.br 
\fB\-bs\fR
.br 
\fB\-bt\fR
.br 
\fB\-bv\fR
.br 
\fB\-bv\fR
.br 
\fB\-G\fR
.br 
\fB\-i\fR
.br 
\fB\-n\fR
.br 
\fB\-v\fR
.br 
\fB\-bd\fR
.br 
\fB\-bD\fR
.br 
\fB\-bh\fR
.br 
\fB\-bH\fR
.br 
\fB\-bi\fR
.br 
\fB\-bp\fR
.br 
\fB\-bP\fR
.br 
\fB\-q\fR
.br 
\fB\-Q\fR
.br 
\fB\-qf\fR
.br 
\fB\-B\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-C\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-d\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-D\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-F\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-h\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-L\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-N\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-O\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-p\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-Q\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-R\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-r\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-V\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-X\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-qG\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-qI\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-qQ\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-qR\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-qS\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-q!I\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-q!Q\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-q!R\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-q!S\fR \fIargument\fP
.br 
\fB\-q\fItext\fR\fP
.br 
\fB\-qp\fItext\fR\fP
.br 
\fB\-o\fItext\fR \fItext\fR\fP
.SH "FILES"
.LP 
.TP 
\fI$HOME/.putmail/\fP
Configuration directory
.TP 
\fI$HOME/.putmail/putmailrc\fP
Default configuration file
.TP 
\fI$HOME/.putmail/putmail.log\fP
Log file for errors and warnings
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.LP 
.TP 
\fBHOME\fP
Specifies the home directory of the invoking user.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP 
Ricardo Garcia Gonzalez: http://sourceforge.net/users/rg3/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP 
mutt(1) muttrc(5) nail(1) mail(1) sendmail(1)
